And it's funny because they'll they'll
be completely wrong, too. They'll be
like, "Well, you hate on bulking. It's
clear you look I can tell you've never
bulked a day in your life." I'm like,
Yeah. You're wrong. I I I grew up on the
eat big to get big. I grew up on the you
got to gain 1 lb a week. And what did it
get It got me fat. Just fat, right.
>> I spent more time
>> when you were in high school, did you
try like weight gainer?
Yeah. Mhm.
>> Right. And it's just sugar. It's just
It's like there's protein in there, but
tons of sugar. And you know, no wonder
no wonder weight gainer is delicious.
It's got more sugar than a Snickers bar
per serving. Yeah, you're just like
drinking nectar, basically. Like
it's just
It It A scoop has 1,000 calories. I'm
like, you can
Like the eating the whole eating big to
getting big, it's just it doesn't make
any sense mechanistically. And it
doesn't have any backing in the data.
What is Why am I going to grow more? So,
if I'm eating at maintenance, why am I
going to now grow more muscle if I
decide, "Hey, instead of eating at
maintenance, I'm going to have an extra
Oreo every day."
Right.
>> What is that going to do?
Just get you fat.
>> [music]
>> Hi. My name's John Jaquish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engine- biomedical
engineering, which gives me a unique
perspective on lots of things, sports
science, health-related,
nutrition-related. Today, I want to talk
to my good friend Colton
about some of the things that we see
regularly mentioned in the space of
scientific conversation about how to get
strong
in in mostly what is the nonsense that
keeps on being promoted as well-founded
science. So, Colton, thanks for being
here today. Thanks for having me. You
You made a couple of videos. In fact,
the way I found you was I found some
self-appointed nutrition expert who used
one of your videos as an example of what
not to do.
And I saw what she put up there and I
was like, "Wow, like this guy actually
has it right and she has it wrong." So,
after telling her that she has it wrong
and then she deleted my comment, I was
like, "I got to I got to find Colton."
Uh so, um
one thing I have always just found so
irritating with fitness conversation is
you need to eat big to get big.
Yeah.
>> Like let's let's riff on how dumb that
is.
I mean, when we're looking at we're
looking at muscle growth, right? The we
By now, everyone should know it's
mechanical tension. That's what's
driving That's what's driving the
growth. Yeah, only only mechanical
tension. Everything else, all the
metabolites, the pump,
the blood flow,
all the yeah, all the metabolites
falling, it is all downstream of
mechanical tension with velocity loss.
Yes. Exactly. Yeah, so we look at what
is actually causing muscle growth, and
then you think, "Okay, what are things
that can aid in this?" And
people will say, "Oh, well, calories."
And that's just not what any of the data
shows. And there's no mechanism, either.
There's no mechanism that could support
this. And we look at, you know, you have
Helms et al. You have um
We have uh getting to like The Helms I I
reference that one all the time. Yeah,
Helms So, like people really like to
hate on the Helms study, and it does
have problems, but we just have it We
have such little literature around this
that we have to use what we have. And if
there's if there's Bias Hang on. Bias
people will find a problem with any
study that does not fit their narrative.
Mhm. You know. It's the sample size.
It's the It's the methods. It's I'm
like, "You know
>> what we have and take that into
account." Yeah, like of course the
sample size wasn't huge, but we look at
it like this study was done during
COVID. Like Yeah. They couldn't have
accounted for that. But anyways, this
study like if there if there was this
magical mechanism that that drove more
growth from more calories, why does it
cap out? Why is it that the group that
ate
uh I believe they ended up actually like
cuz the the prescribed intakes were
maintenance, 5%, 15% over over
maintenance. Right.
>> the actual intakes ended up being I
believe 7%, 18%, and like 30% over
maintenance. Yeah.
>> So, it turned out to be an the actual
study turned out to be little surplus,
medium surplus, really big surplus.
Right.
>> So, why did all of these groups not in-
Like why did the biggest surplus group
not gain significant muscle?
>> Right. In fact, why did they not gain
any more muscle?
Right.
They gained a little bit more strength,
but that that outcome is very easily
explained if you just understand physics
and moment arms.
If they have more fat,
they have a longer moment arm. They have
better leverage. That's why they Like
that's why they had a tiny tiny bit more
strength in the biceps. And people will
see their the study and they'll look at
the methods and they'll say, "Oh, well,
they weren't doing enough volume."
What?
Right.
>> Just cuz they were doing less volume
than they were before doesn't mean they
weren't doing enough
to grow. We know that two
>> body doesn't have a mechanism to store
excess protein.
Yeah, it's very it's very weird. The The
Jose Antonio studies are always the ones
that I reference with those, the protein
overeating. Yeah. Again, those are
studies that people will nitpick.
They'll pick apart. They'll say, "Oh,
it's a bod pod. Oh, there's not a ton of
control." Yeah. And I'm like, but it
that doesn't mean there's nothing that
we can take away from it.
Yeah. Also, these people are just people
who are just looking for something to
complain about. Yeah. Um you know, I
mean, like it it doesn't matter. They
They've got a narrative. Mhm.
>> It's like It's like talking to somebody
on CNN. Like if it fits if it fits what
they want, you know, if it makes you
know, the orange man look like he's
evil, then they want to talk about it.
If it doesn't, then they want to pretend
like it didn't happen. Mhm. And you
know, that's not journalism. And I think
a lot of what these science-based
science-based guys uh talk about
um
they're not science-based at all. No.
>> Like they're they're bias-based. Yeah, I
mean, half of them haven't even read
Half of them haven't even read an
abstract. And half of them haven't even
read past an abstract. Like
>> Right.
We just
>> Yeah. Everyone Everyone calls it
science-based. Just bec- Anyone can
follow Chris Beardsley and read a couple
of his posts, and then now they're
officially a science-based lifter.
Right. Like
it's just funny. It And then And then
they stick to their biases just as bad
as Chris Beardsley does.
They do. And uh right. And it's like you
you
I I will It's tough for for me you know,
I sell a variable resistance product, so
I'm very double down on variable
resistance. Mhm. But I'll certainly talk
about the one study that said variable
resistance was not effective.
And I don't I didn't approach it from
the perspective that I wanted to find my
product. You know, I read the study and
I read what they did and
when I realized that the people training
without variable resistance could select
whatever weight they wanted and the
people training with variable resistance
only had access to one
piece of
um
What's it called? A TheraBand.
So, they were only allowed to train with
5 lbs.
And then the other people could lift
whatever weights they wanted. Mhm. That
That was the one study that said
variable resistance didn't do anything.
And I was just like, well
like did you design this? Yeah. To fail?
Like I kind of think you did.
So, you know, it it's it's one of those
things, but I still read it like, okay,
well maybe they discovered something
that I don't know about. Yeah. I mean,
you have to go into every study with an
open mind. Yeah. You can't go into it
wanting You can't go into it wanting the
results to be one way or wanting to like
discredit the results. Like with the
whole walking debate, I'll look at
Roseneck 2002 for example, right? Like
we had young We had people that
had a a really big surplus and they
recomped. They didn't gain They gained
more muscle from the big surplus. And
part of that is like, yeah, is it
because they were untrained lifters? I
don't know. Is it because I could pick
apart the methods? I could say it was
2002, they weren't using DEXA, they
weren't like They all of these problems
with it. But or I can just look at it
and say, you know, there this is an
interesting study and I think that we
need Like this is this is a a field that
we need way more research on. Like I'll
be the first to admit it. I I literally
I DM Dr. Helms probably weekly asking
him to remake his study because it's a
it's a great study and it and the
methods are solid. Like if you if it had
a higher sample size and a lower dropout
rate, obviously we can you know, it's
not like he was making his study and he
was like, yeah, I'm going to I'm going
to make this study
I'm going to start this study right
before a global pandemic happens.
happens. And so
the the study isn't the best because of
that and I I need it needs to be redone
and we need more data on this. But
again, when we don't have data, that's
when we rely on mechanisms. And when we
look at the mechanisms, there are not
People will point to AMPK and they'll
point to insulin. Right.
>> And mTOR, but when you look at the
actual correlation between those things
and hypertrophy, between lean mass gain,
there's there's almost none. Even the
correlation between myostatin, between
myofibrillar protein synthesis and rate
of lean mass gain, it's not it's like
point one.
Yeah.
And interestingly enough
mTOR signaling tends to be inhibited in
hyper responders to resistance training.
So, there's just so much that we don't
know that you can't even mechanistically
there's not a there's not a reason that
would say why bulking or just being in a
surplus would be more anabolic. Right.
Yeah.
Yeah, no evidence. So, yeah, everybody
you guys need to write that down. Like
you don't need to eat big to get big.
You need protein.
And there's there's like a very known
quantity of protein. So, you know, 1 g
per pound of body weight is that that's
pretty much what you stick to, right?
Yeah. I mean, it just depends like on
the the person, right? Like being over
in the preference because I'm always
like, if you're at that point eight
grams per pound roughly, you're pretty
much good, especially if you're eating
at maintenance. But going over, there's
no there's no downside to going over.
Especially you're going to be more
satiated and like like fats, you don't
really need a ton. You just need to not
be below a floor.
And then with carbs, same thing. We
don't need to have a ton of them. I
mean, really
all from the last two studies the two
studies out of King's lab that just came
out, the two meta-analyses about One was
about intra acute carb work acute carb
ingestion. So, it was like they did
intra workout and
workout. Then the other one was just the
carb rinse mouth rinsing. Both of those
found that as long as you can keep your
blood glucose high post workout you only
really And then they the
the correlation between the dosing it
was like as long as you're at point four
grams per kilogram
it's really you're going to get about as
much as you can. Like it was a slight
uptrend, but even going from point four
grams per kilogram up to two grams per
kilogram, you're barely seeing any
difference. So, you you don't need to to
super carb max.
And and we see again, Helms again,
great researcher. We look at his
meta-analysis with Refalo and the
um
and the protein in a deficit, more
protein like there was not a cut point.
It was when you're in a deficit, more
protein is always better. Obviously
there we know we know practically
there's going to be a point where
there's a where it's more protein is
going to be worse cuz it's going to cut
into your obviously your the calories in
it, but it's also going to cut into your
ability to reallocate other macros. But
when we look at what the data shows
that's where you get into those higher
numbers of where
going over 1 g per pound might even be
beneficial. You see outliers in the
studies.
One one thing that that I've noticed is
that
like let's say I'm
just trying to be a little leaner. So,
I've got a significant deficit, but
protein protein surplus or, you know, 1
g per pound I'm getting getting the
right amount of protein.
What I notice is I will get stronger
every workout. Like every workout
there's incremental strength gain. I'm
breaking my record every single time. I
have very very fine measurement
equipment in like the we have a we have
an X3 bar that captures all the force
data. Oh, okay.
>> And so I look at that and it's just like
I mean to the pound, you know, like one
you know, eighth of a rep is still like
at the end because cuz you you fatigue
in diminishing range the the reps get
shorter and shorter as you as you go
closer to fatigue.
That way you fatigue separately in each
range of motion in in one set where
you're full of glycogen.
You know, when you do that like
and you go up in strength every time
even at a deficit. It's like I don't see
my scale weight going up. I see it going
down.
Mhm. But I know my strength is going up.
But then let's say I have a day where I
just eat to maintenance, you know, it's
like a I go to a party or something like
that and there's a lot of food there.
That it looks like I put on like 3 lbs
of muscle overnight.
You know, because like everything's just
like swollen and coming in and then it's
just like, okay, all I'm doing is
hydrating muscle that I already built
that I just hadn't really hydrated yet.
Yeah.
And I and I think that just that talk
track right there that has eluded
people. Like they need they think they
need to be like bloated.
Like literally bloated feeling and
and that's what muscle growth feels
like. No.
Not at all. No.
Yeah. And then they say
they'll always say that like the the
argument I always hear is, oh, I didn't
start seeing any progress until I
started bulking. And that brings me back
to the leverage because we also see
people who are like, oh, well I bulk up
and then I cut down and I I bulk up and
I get strong and then I cut down and I
lose all my muscle.
That just tells me right away
>> It wasn't muscle. Yeah, you just got
fat. You had greater internal moment arm
lengths. So, your leverage was better.
And then you got skinny again and those
leverages went back down. And you didn't
do anything. You're just in this
perpetual cycle of getting fat and
getting skinny and spinning your wheels.
And then part of it comes down to the
practicality-wise of it of like, I don't
want to be
afraid to take my shirt off for six
months of the year to arbitrarily maybe
build more muscle.
I mean, hey, if that worked
then we would do it. But it doesn't.
Yeah. Like I I think you know, Dorian
Yates said, you know, if if it would
have helped me grow muscle to eat dog
in between sets, I would have been
doing it.
But you know, it just so happens that
there's a proper amount of training
stimulus
and then you need the body to recover.
There's a proper way to approach
nutrition.
And you need to follow those principles
and that's it. Mhm. Um but dude, I I'm
so thankful that you are out there. Like
every time I It's very rare when I when
I find somebody that's like damn, this
guy gets pretty much every Like I I'm
saying pretty much because we may not
agree on something, but I haven't found
that something yet. I've probably
watched a hundred of your videos. It's
just like this guy, it's like he's just
got everything like so clear
uh uh of view of the landscape of
research. And you know, like like you
were saying in the beginning,
nothing's definitive. Nothing's ever
definitive. No. But
it's like let's look at it pragmatically
and let's be able to challenge
what some of the sort of guys say like
this just the way things are like like
eat big to get big. Like it's just not
true and I'm not going to shut up about
the fact that I don't agree with that
and I don't think any I think you're
worse off if you follow that advice.
I agree.
Colton, tell people where they can find
you.
Yeah, you can find me anywhere. Same
username. It's K O L T 45 Fitness with a
K. K O L T 45 Fitness. Anywhere, all
platforms. That's where I'll be.
I love it.
Thanks, man. And
audience, thanks and we'll see you on
the next one. If this video helped you,
I want you to subscribe and follow. I'm
going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights.
We've got the answer for you.